Cancer in your 20s is terrifying – too many of us are left to cope alone
Survival rates for 13- to 24-year-olds are rising. Yet poorer patients fare less well, and vital post-cancer care is still lacking
When I was diagnosed with leukaemia in 2013, aged 22, I was shocked to find out how little survival rates had improved among young people with cancer in recent decades. Research had left us “forgotten in the middle” between children and older adults, as one study put it, with improvements in outcomes among teens and twentysomethings lagging behind the dramatic advances seen among the general population.
So the encouraging trends revealed by last week’s Teenage Cancer Trust (TCT) report, the first detailed analysis of 13- to 24-year-olds with cancer in the UK, are cause for celebration. Mortality rates for all cancers in the age group have fallen by almost a third, from 42.9 per million in 2001 to 32.3 per million in 2015. Five-year survival rates have risen by four percentage points (from 83% in females/80% males in 2001-05 to 87% females/84% males in the 2007-11 period).
It’s hugely welcome news – as is NHS England’s recognition of the need to prioritise young people with cancer in its long-term plan announced last week, including the goal of 50% of young people having access to clinical trials by 2025. Clinical trials, which give participants access to new forms of treatment, are generally considered a marker of high-quality care. Teens and young adults have historically been under-represented in such trials, while children have a much higher participation rate, which is thought to be one reason for the impressive advances in child cancer survival rates.
But we can’t be complacent – there is still so much more to be done. The report shows that young cancer patients from deprived areas have significantly lower five-year survival rates than their more privileged peers (survival for patients from the most deprived areas is 84%, as opposed to 88% for patients from the least deprived areas). More research is urgently needed to find out why so that these inequalities can be addressed: no young person should face a worse prognosis because of their background.
There is also an urgent need for more support for teenagers and young adults throughout their cancer treatment and beyond. Currently only about half of all young cancer patients are treated on one of TCT’s 28 hospitals units, where they receive care from specialist nurses and counsellors. Although National Institute for Health and Care Excellence directives state that all young people under 19 must be cared for in age-appropriate facilities, and those over 19 should also have unhindered access to age-appropriate facilities and support when needed, in reality this often isn’t the case. Many teenagers feel isolated on children’s wards with crying babies; young adults are often treated on general cancer wards, as I was, surrounded by elderly patients and constant bereavement.
Too many of us – half of all 13-24-year-olds with cancer, according to a 2018 TCT report – have no access to psychological support. After I was told that my leukaemia was more aggressive than doctors originally thought, I asked my consultant if I could speak to a counsellor. At the time I was undergoing high-dose chemotherapy while I waited desperately for a matching stem-cell donor to be found. I felt trapped in a body that seemed determined to self-destruct; I was overwhelmed by anxiety and terrified of dying. I told my consultant I was struggling to sleep. He said there weren’t any counsellors – in a major London hospital – and offered to write a prescription for sleeping pills instead.
In 2018, I finally celebrated my five-year-survival milestone. I’m thrilled, but I’m also worn out – the end of cancer treatment was just the beginning of a complicated recovery and often a battle to get urgent medical care. For many of us young survivors, it’s easy to feel like a ticked box in the eyes of the health system and the world around us, while we mourn lost opportunities and struggle to recover a semblance of normality. Long-term side-effects from treatment, such as pain, fatigue and compromised immunity, can seriously harm our chances of returning to work or studies. A survey by the CLIC Sargent charity for children and young adults with cancer suggested that many young adults were unable to work or even find work long after their diagnosis, with a quarter of participants reporting that their employer had not made the adjustments they needed at work.
Ultimately, we need more government investment, to increase access to clinical trials as well as develop specialist support for teens and young adults. Education providers and employers also need to do their bit – whether that’s offering a young person the chance to work part time for a job listed as full time – or accepting an applicant with slightly lower exam grades because they were going through treatment at the time. It’s in their own interests to do so because young cancer survivors have many valuable skills. And as an interviewee once told me: “When you’ve been in a hospital bed next to someone dying of a stroke, it shows employers you know how to handle a crisis.”
• Hannah Partos is a freelance journalist
