Private pupils talk mockney to seem less posh: Harrow's ex-head
Tony Blair, George Osborne and royals all use ‘estuary English, says Barnaby Lenon
Former private school pupils often speak in a mockney accent in adulthood in an effort not to seem posh, the former head of Harrow has said.
Many people who went to elite fee-paying schools do not want to seem upper-class because “being posh these days is not a good thing”, according to Barnaby Lenon.
He made the comments following research into prep school language carried out by Graeme Davis, a professorial research fellow in humanities at the University of Buckingham.
The research found prep school language has its origins in cockney rhyming slang, due to what Davis described as a “levelling” of language when children from different backgrounds were brought together after the second world war.
Davis said: “We might expect children at English preparatory schools in the postwar years to have an upper-class language register. They don’t.
“Instead we see a levelled form of language which includes all social classes, including London cockney, the slang of soldiers in two world wars and the jargon of criminals.”
The so-called “estuary English”, created when people moved out of the East End of London and took their accents with them, is still a feature of some speech today, said Lenon, who is the new dean of the University of Buckingham school of education.
He said: “There has long been a tendency for schoolchildren at private schools to adopt their own language and certainly with an emphasis on mockney.
“It continues into adult life. George Osborne and Tony Blair are both prone to lapse into estuary English so they resemble the Kray brothers rather more than the private school background they come from. Remember the Old Etonian Prince William saying: ‘I need to check this with the missus.’
“Former pupils from elite private schools went out of their way to hide their education. It is very important when you are with non-Etonians to try to conceal that you are an Etonian. They do not want to appear to be upper-class because being upper-class these days is not a good thing.
“If you are in politics, for instance, you want to appear to be a man of the people. I would say that most Etonians and Harrovians these days go out of their way to employ an estuary accent.”
